Improve WordPress image: fix bugs, add WP-CLI support, update docs (#55)
civicrm/civicrm-docker: README.md

If you are looking for a **ready to use** CiviCRM application, use `civicrm/civicrm`. If you are looking for an image that you can use as part of a customised **Docker build process**, use `civicrm/civicrm-base`.

> Note: WordPress images are fully implemented but not yet published to Docker Hub. Other CMS integrations (Joomla, Backdrop, Drupal) are not currently available.

Reviewer: We should publish the WordPress image when this PR is merged so let's remove references to it not being published.

```suggestion
Note: there are currently no official images for CiviCRM with Joomla, Backdrop, or Drupal.
```

    E[wordpress]
    D[wordpress-base] --> E
    A --> D
```

> Note: WordPress images are fully implemented but not yet published to Docker Hub.

Reviewer: As above let's remove this line entirely.

- **--step** - run one step at a time

Note: before running `./build.php`, you will need to install the required dependencies with `composer install` (see https://getcomposer.org/ for more details).

> ## WordPress

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this would be better as a separate file rather than including this in the main README. It feels a bit hidden at the bottom of this file. Perhaps better to keep separate and put a link in the first section of the main README?

> The WordPress + CiviCRM images provide CiviCRM running as a WordPress plugin. These images are fully implemented but not yet published to Docker Hub.

Reviewer: As above, let's remove the comment about the images not being published.

```suggestion
The WordPress + CiviCRM images provide CiviCRM running as a WordPress plugin.
```

If you are looking for a **ready to use** WordPress + CiviCRM application, use `civicrm/wordpress`. If you are building a custom image, use `civicrm/wordpress-base`.

### Quick start

**Note**: These instructions are for testing purposes, not production deployment.

#### Running the image

```shell
docker run --detach --publish 8000:80 civicrm/wordpress
```

You must complete the installation process (see below) before WordPress and CiviCRM are usable.

#### With docker compose

A complete example is in the [`example/wordpress`](example/wordpress) directory.

1. Clone this repository: `git clone https://github.com/civicrm/civicrm-docker`
2. Change directory: `cd civicrm-docker/example/wordpress`

> 3. Review/edit `.env` file (contains passwords and admin credentials)

Reviewer: There is no `.env` file in this repo so this would need to be created.

```suggestion
3. Create a `.env` file with the required environment variables (see below)
```

Perhaps we should add a `.env-example` file with the required variables that could be copied and edited?

4. Start containers: `docker compose up -d`
5. Wait for database initialization: `docker compose logs -f db` (wait for "ready for connections")
6. Install WordPress and CiviCRM: `docker compose exec -u www-data app civicrm-docker-install`
7. Visit http://localhost:8760 and log in with credentials from `.env`
8. When finished: `docker compose down`

#### Using WP-CLI

The WordPress images include a bash alias so that `wp` automatically runs as the `www-data` user via `sudo`. This means you can run WP-CLI commands directly when logged in as root:

```shell
docker compose exec app wp plugin list
```

> Without the `-u www-data` flag, the alias handles running as the correct user.

Reviewer: As above, I would be inclined to remove the bash script and be explicit about running as the `www-data` user in commands.

```suggestion
The image includes the WP-CLI. Make sure that you run this as the `www-data` user rather than `root`.

```shell
docker compose exec -u www-data app wp plugin list
```
```

Reviewer 2: @wmortada you are correct if the use case is to _always_ use `docker compose exec`  however,  `docker container exec` is valid and very useful.   

I agree the script is not strictly necessary, but we should cover common use cases.  As I use `docker container exec` I am considering it common.

Reviewer: @kcristiano thanks for explaining the use case. I'll respond to the wider point in another comment but for the README I think it would still be better to be explicit about the user.

### Development

For local CiviCRM development, use the compose override to bind-mount your local code:

```shell
docker compose -f compose.yaml -f compose.dev.yaml up -d
```

This overrides the image's CiviCRM plugin with your local copy — changes appear immediately in the container. See [`example/wordpress/compose.dev.yaml`](example/wordpress/compose.dev.yaml) for details.

### Environment variables

**CiviCRM database**:

> - `CIVICRM_DB_HOST`, `CIVICRM_DB_PORT`, `CIVICRM_DB_NAME`, `CIVICRM_DB_USER`, `CIVICRM_DB_PASSWORD`

Reviewer: I think this would be easier to read if these were on separate lines like the WordPress database below.

```suggestion
- `CIVICRM_DB_HOST`
- `CIVICRM_DB_PORT`
- `CIVICRM_DB_NAME`
- `CIVICRM_DB_USER`
- `CIVICRM_DB_PASSWORD`
```

- OR `CIVICRM_DSN` (e.g., `mysql://user:pass@host:3306/database`)

**WordPress database**:
- `WORDPRESS_DB_HOST` - Database host (e.g., `db`)
- `WORDPRESS_DB_NAME` - Database name (typically same as CiviCRM database)
- `WORDPRESS_DB_USER` - Database user
- `WORDPRESS_DB_PASSWORD` - Database password
- `WORDPRESS_CONFIG_FILE` - Path to store wp-config.php (e.g., `/var/www/private/wp-config.php`)

**Site configuration**:
- `CIVICRM_UF_BASEURL` - Site URL (e.g., `http://localhost:8760`)
- `WORDPRESS_SITE_TITLE` - WordPress site title

**Installation credentials**:
- `CIVICRM_ADMIN_USER` - Admin username
- `CIVICRM_ADMIN_PASS` - Admin password
- `CIVICRM_ADMIN_EMAIL` - Admin email

**Optional**:
- `APACHE_PORT` - Override Apache port inside container (default: 80)
- `PHP_MEMORY_LIMIT` - PHP memory limit (default: 256M)

### Installation

The `civicrm/wordpress` image includes a `civicrm-docker-install` script that:

> 1. Creates wp-config.php at `WORDPRESS_CONFIG_FILE` location

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Creates a `wp-config.php` file at `WORDPRESS_CONFIG_FILE` location
```

2. Installs WordPress core
3. Installs CiviCRM

**Prerequisites**: All environment variables must be set.

```shell
docker compose exec -u www-data app civicrm-docker-install
```

**Important**: Run as `www-data` user to ensure correct file permissions.

See [build/wordpress/civicrm-docker-install](build/wordpress/civicrm-docker-install) for details.

### Volumes

The following volumes should be persisted:

```yaml
volumes:
  - wpcontent:/var/www/html/wp-content  # Plugins, themes, and uploads

>   - private:/var/www/private             # WordPress config

Reviewer: Very minor, but it would be good to align the comments.

```suggestion
  - wpcontent:/var/www/html/wp-content  # Plugins, themes, and uploads
  - private:/var/www/private            # WordPress config
```

```

On first run, Docker automatically populates the `wpcontent` volume with the image contents (including CiviCRM). Plugins and themes installed via WordPress admin are persisted across container restarts.

### Tags

WordPress images use the same tagging strategy as CiviCRM Standalone:

- `civicrm/wordpress:latest` - Latest stable CiviCRM + recommended PHP
- `civicrm/wordpress:6` - Latest CiviCRM 6.x + recommended PHP
- `civicrm/wordpress:6.0` - Latest CiviCRM 6.0.x + recommended PHP
- `civicrm/wordpress:6.0-php8.3` - CiviCRM 6.0.x with PHP 8.3
- `civicrm/wordpress:php8.3` - Latest stable CiviCRM with PHP 8.3

### Building images

Build WordPress images locally using the Dockerfile:

```shell
docker build build/wordpress \
  --build-arg WORDPRESS_VERSION=6.9 \
  --build-arg CIVICRM_VERSION=6.0 \
  --build-arg PHP_VERSION=8.3 \
  -t my-org/wordpress-civicrm
```

Or use the build script:

```shell
# Install dependencies first
composer install

# Build WordPress images
./build.php --image-filter=wordpress-base,wordpress --php-version=8.3 --skip-push
```

> This builds the full hierarchy: `common-base` → `wordpress-base` → `wordpress`.

Reviewer: The build steps are pretty much the same for all images. I'm not sure if we need the Building Images section specifically for WordPress. Perhaps this could be removed or incorporated into the main section of the README above?
